Initial working draft of File Management guide. (#3552)
beeware/toga: docs/how-to/topics/file-management.rst

Relative paths might work with simple Toga scripts. However, when you get into packaging applications, things change. When you double-click on an icon to run an app, what directory is considered the current working directory? Is it the directory containing the app bundle? Is it the directory in the app bundle that holds the executable? There isn't a solid answer. The question we really need to answer is, how can we reliably tell an app where to look for file content?

If we can't rely on the current working directory to construct relative paths, what *can* we use? We need to use absolute paths.

Absolute paths
==============

There are multiple ways to construct absolute paths in Python.

The most basic method is to spell out the entire path. For example, on macOS or Unix, to access ``file.txt`` in a directory called ``file_directory`` in your home directory, you could use ``~/file_directory/file.txt``.

> In any Python file, ``__file__`` resolves to the absolute path to the location of file being executed, provided as a string. We can use this to construct paths; for example, ``Path(__file__).parent`` is the parent directory of the currently running Python program.

Reviewer: Might want a lead in here like "Python also provides some tools to build absolute paths based on properties of the running python code."

> The ``pathlib`` module, from the Python standard library, provides several absolute path options including ``Path.cwd()``, which is the path to the current working directory, and ``Path.home()``, which is the path to your home directory.

Reviewer: Part of this content needs to be tied into the previous paragraph, as it's not necessarily clear where `Path()` came from.

Let's take a look at an example of reading file contents from a file using the basic method to construct an absolute path.

> Create a new Briefcase project (for a refresher on how to do this, see `the BeeWare tutorial <https://docs.beeware.org/en/latest/tutorial/tutorial-1.html>`__). Once you've created that project, update ``app.py`` in the project to contain the following:

Reviewer: "... in this example, we've used a formal name of `Config File Creator`" (or similar), to give the lead in to how to drive Briefcase to give the following stub.

.. code-block:: python

    from pathlib import Path

    import toga
    from toga.style.pack import COLUMN

    class ConfigFileCreator(toga.App):
        def startup(self):
            self.text_input = toga.MultilineTextInput()

>             self.config_directory = toga.TextInput(readonly=True)

Reviewer: Minor nit - might want to name this `config_directory_input`, so it doesn't read as if it *is* the config directory.

Reviewer: (or a similar, shorter name...)

                on_press=self.load_button_pressed,
                margin=20,
            )
            save_button = toga.Button(
                text="Save user configuration",
                on_press=self.save_button_pressed,
                margin=20,
            )

            main_box = toga.Box(
                direction=COLUMN,
                children=[self.text_input, self.config_directory, load_button, save_button],
            )
            self.main_window = toga.MainWindow(content=main_box)
            self.main_window.show()

        def load_button_pressed(self, button, **kwargs):
            path = Path("/Users/brutus/config-file-creator/initial_config.toml")
            self.text_input.value = path.read_text(encoding="utf-8")

        def save_button_pressed(self, button, **kwargs):
            self.config_directory.value = "Save not implemented."

    def main():
        return ConfigFileCreator()

This creates a multi-line text input with a button that loads the contents of an ``initial_config.toml`` file into the text input. The file content is read from the file using ``pathlib.Path().read_text()`` with a hard-coded *absolute* file path.

> Now, if we run ``briefcase dev``, the app will fail to start, resulting in a ``FileNotFoundError``. This version worked great on Brutus' computer. However, the moment we try to start the app on a different machine, the path is no longer valid, and it will fail to run when it can't find the file.

Reviewer: The app will start - but it will fail when you press the button.

You might be thinking, the issue is that the file is not located in the application. Let's examine this as a possibility. Here is a the basic structure of a Briefcase project:

.. code-block:: console

    configfilecreator/
    └── src/
        └── configfilecreator/
            ├── app.py
            └── resources/

> One possible option is in the top level ``configfilecreator/`` directory, as that's the location from which we actually run the app. This may have been what Brutus was intending with the path they specified. While we could point our code to this location as an absolute path, we will still run into the problem when running the app from anywhere else but our own computer.

Reviewer: One possible option *for storing the file*...

> A second possible option might be to put the file in ``configfilecreator/src/configfilecreator`` because that's where the ``app.py`` file is. After all, Python bases file access on the directory from which the program is being run. While the second option does ensure Briefcase packages the file with the app, it still doesn't guarantee a consistent path.

Reviewer: This is a really good point to make; but it's probably less obvious unless you make the path to `initial_ config.toml` a relative path. Maybe an example here with a `load_button_pressed`, updated to use a relative path?

To avoid the possibility of either of the above happening accidentally, Briefcase sets the current working directory to elsewhere so we aren't caught by this issue.

Let's take a look at an example of packaging the file content with the app, and using ``__file__`` to locate it.

Create an ``initial_config.toml`` file containing the following content, and place it in the ``resources/`` directory within the Briefcase project:

.. code-block:: toml

    # Update the following to match your configuration
    PROJECT_NAME = "Name"
    PROJECT_VERSION = "v0.0.0"

>     AUTHOR_NAME = "Your Name"

Reviewer: If we're going to add another "relative that doesn't work" example, we might need this content further up the page.

        self.text_input.value = path.read_text(encoding="utf-8")

Now when you run the app, it will start, and the button will successfully load the contents of the file into the multi-line text input. This works in this situation, because we have only one app file, and the standard directory structure. However, in a more complex application with multiple levels of modules, or when calling a library that is independent of the app, to use ``Path(__file__)``, we would need to know where the file that is reading the code is in the code checkout relative to the ``resources`` directory.

So, how do we get the benefits of absolute paths, but ensure that the file can be found regardless of where the app is being run? This is where Toga can help.

App paths
=========

Toga includes an :doc:`app paths <../../reference/api/resources/app_paths>` feature that provides a selection of known locations on the user's computer. Provided as ``pathlib.Path`` objects, they are known-safe locations for reading and writing files, that are specific to each operating system. Each user running an application will have their own unique app paths.

> The read-only path location, ``paths.app``, provides an anchor from the location of the app file. [#f1]_ It can therefore be used to construct absolute paths based on the app file location within the package. For this to work, we need to package the file with our app. Briefcase guarantees that any file in the project directory (``configfilecreator/src/configfilecreator`` in the example project structure shown above), will be included with the packaged app, including the contents of any subdirectories. There are other ways to ensure a file is included - see the :doc:`Source <../../reference/api/resources/sources/source>` documentation for details.

Reviewer: The reference to Briefcase's packaging behavior has been referred to indirectly above; might want to restructure that section further up the page to the point where we're creating the initial_config.toml content.

Reviewer: The `sources` reference her his a different thing - I was referring to the Briefcase setting. Toga's `sources` are dynamic sources of data for lists, tables, trees etc.

Let's build on the previous example to use the ``paths.app`` to locate the file.

Update ``load_button_pressed`` handler to the following:

.. code-block:: python

    def load_button_pressed(self, button, **kwargs):
        path = self.paths.app /  "resources" / "initial_config.toml"
        self.text_input.value = path.read_text(encoding="utf-8")

The path to the file is being constructed from the ``self.paths.app`` ``Path`` object, instead of a hard-coded absolute path. This means that no matter where the app is being run from, it always knows where to find the file within the package.

When we run the app, it starts successfully. We can click the button, and we'll see the contents of the file loaded into the text input. This will also work when using ``briefcase run``, or with any mode of deployment, including desktop or mobile platforms, because ``paths.app`` will adapt to local conditions.

> We've successfully read from a file packaged within our app. What about writing a file? This gets more complicated Let's explore how to use app paths to write files to the file system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've successfully read from a file packaged within our app. What about writing a file? This gets more complicated. Let's explore how to use app paths to write files to the file system.
```

Writing Files
=============

So far, we've used ``paths.app``, which should be considered read-only. Toga won't stop you from writing to the app directory, and in testing, it will almost always work. However, once you ship your packaged app in production, writing to the app will fail. The overall reason is permissions, but it is a bit different for each operating system.

- On Windows, you can install an app as a user or for all users. "All users" requires admin privileges, however when you run the app as a user, you are no longer running it as an admin, and you will not be permitted to write to that location.
- On macOS, the contents of an app are contained within the app bundle. It is a file in a directory, however the contents have been signed and notarized, which cryptographically seals the bundle, and if you try to write to it, you will break that seal and end up with problems running the app.

> - On Unix, even if ``sudo`` is used to install the app, it installs to a directory that the user does not have permissions to write to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- On Unix, if ``sudo`` is used to install the app into `/usr` (or a similar location), it installs to a directory that the user does not have permissions to write to.
```

You can read from ``paths.app``, but you shouldn't write to it.

So, what if you want to generate a file through your app and save it? Toga provides four writable paths available for storing files associated with an app:

> - ``data``: The location for storing user data.

Reviewer: Do we need to be explicit these are `paths.data`, etc?

Run the app and click the "Load initial configuration" button to load the file contents into the text input. Update the variables to whatever you like. Click the save button to generate the file. In your file explorer or terminal, you can use the path displayed below the input to find and view your new configuration file directly.

Updating an existing file
=========================

Now that the configuration file is generated, you may want to update it. You could use the same app to load the contents of ``initial_config.toml`` and update that info to the new configuration, but then you may not know what the previous changes were. Instead, you can tell the app to check for an existing configuration file, and load the contents of that if it exists.

Update the ``load_button_pressed`` handler in ``app.py`` to the following:

.. code-block:: python

    def load_button_pressed(self, button, **kwargs):
        path = self.paths.config / "config.toml"
        if not path.exists():

>             path = self.paths.app / "resources/initial_config.toml"

Reviewer: Discrepancy here in `"resources/initial_config.toml"` vs `"resources" / "initial_config.toml"`. Both are valid, but we should be consistent.

Author: This was from the previous version. I had it updated in the actual Python file for this, but missed updating it here. Fixing.
